---
layout: post
title:  "Lea VanderVelde and Social Networking in the Frontier's Global Business: The Fur Trade / A Palladio Open Design Case Study"
author: Mark Braude
date:   2014-08-11 11:34:22
category: palladio
published: true
tags: 
excerpt: "Professor Vandervelde has been using Palladio to explore and visualize a large and rich correspondence set generated by the American Fur Trade Company, with the aim of mapping and analyzing flows of communication, money, and power in the frontier."

---

Lea VanderVelde is the principal investigator for The Law of the Antebellum Frontier project at the Stanford Spatial History Lab. In this capacity, she has been exploring ways to use Palladio in her research, and in turn has been helping Humanities + Design to think about the development of Palladio.RESEARCHER BIOLea VanderVelde is Josephine R. Witte Professor of Law at the University of Iowa College of Law. Her research fields include employment law, property law, legal history, and constitutional law. She is interested in how digital research technologies will help us to consider the expansion of the American nation in the critical years before the Civil War in new ways, which will in turn give insight into the unique roles the law played in the expanding American empire.PROJECT OVERVIEW: The Law of the Antebellum FrontierThis project concerns the legal and economic mechanisms at work on the American frontier in the early 1800s. Understanding these mechanisms reflects upon how empires expand and how American expansion into the Ohio and Mississippi river basins shaped American identity and the constitutional amendments after the Civil War. The project uses GIS mapping, geolocation, social network modeling and text mining to examine large amounts of very old texts in the antebellum frontier.  PALLADIO-SPECIFIC PROJECT COMPONENTS:Social Networking in the Frontier’s Global Business: The Fur TradeProfessor Vandervelde has been using Palladio to explore and visualize a large and rich correspondence set generated by the American Fur Trade Company, with the aim of mapping and analyzing flows of communication, money, and power in the frontier.We will be working together in the near future towards creating an interactive project, in which specific instances of her data as visualized in Palladio would reside permanently within an online publication that Professor VanderVelde would produce. Visitors to this publication/site would be able to manipulate the data (using facet, timeline filters etc.) within a Palladio interface to engage with this research interactively.More about the project can be found at: http://www.stanford.edu/group/spatialhistory/cgi-bin/site/project.php?id=1057.